android cicd article (#206)
rootstrap/blog: content/Android App Build and Release Automation - Sebastian Lopez.md

<img src="images/android_robot.jpg" height="500" />

Now, I am going to describe the approach we implemented for Android CI/CD, making use of Fastlane and a CI system (GitHub Actions). We used Amazon S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we can safely store encrypted files will work.

For this example, we'll use an Android app developed with React Native, but the same approach works when using other languages supported by the Android SDK, such as Kotlin. The key assumption here is that we will use [Gradle](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases/gradle-plugin) when building the APK.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##The Preparation 
```

> ##The Preparation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##The Leg Work
```

### Registering Apps

Within our Android project, we will define multiple [build flavors](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/build-variants), specified in our `build.gradle` file. For each of these, we would register an application in the Google Play Console.
After registering apps we will need the following:
* A keystore file generated with Android Studio: https://developer.android.com/studio/publish/app-signing#generate-key
* An API key (in json format) with permissions to publish apps into the Play Console: https://developers.google.com/android-publisher

Both files should be placed in a secure location, with the credentials required to retrieve them stored in the repo Secrets.

> ### Code Signing & API keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Code Signing & API Keys
```

> In order to distribute our app, our APK needs to be signed with a certificate generated by Google. Unlike iOS, Fastlane does not offer an equivalent to their match feature which can handle certificate creation and management end to end. So, we need to generate it manually once from Android Studio, following the steps in their [User Guide](https://developer.android.com/studio/publish/app-signing), and then store it somewhere our CICD can retrieve it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to distribute our app, our APK needs to be signed with a certificate generated by Google. Unlike iOS, Fastlane does not offer an equivalent to their match feature which can handle certificate creation and management end-to- end. So, we need to generate it manually once from Android Studio, following the steps in their [User Guide](https://developer.android.com/studio/publish/app-signing), and then store it somewhere our CICD can retrieve it. 
```

For the latter, we will make use of [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/getting-started/). This is a good option for us as we typically use AWS S3 in all our projects, and have to set AWS credentials in our working environment. One single bucket, encrypted with [AWS KMS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/UsingKMSEncryption.html) allows us to securely handle our Certificates, Keystores and other sensitive files for all our projects. 

> In order to upload our APK via the [Google Play Developer API](https://developers.google.com/android-publisher), we also need an API JSON keyfile associated with a service account that will allow Fastlane to authenticate. After creating one on the [Google Play console](https://console.cloud.google.com/iam-admin/serviceaccounts). We can either store the entire JSON string as a Secret to retrieve as environment variable, or do the same as with the keystore, and place it on S3 for GitHub Actions to download and use during the build run (we will use the latter in this example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to upload our APK via the [Google Play Developer API](https://developers.google.com/android-publisher), we also need an API JSON keyfile associated with a service account that will allow Fastlane to authenticate. After creating one on the [Google Play console](https://console.cloud.google.com/iam-admin/serviceaccounts), we can either store the entire JSON string as a Secret to retrieve as an environment variable, or do the same as with the Keystore, and place it on S3 for GitHub Actions to download and use during the build run (we will use the latter in this example).
```

* Keystore and Upload Key(Alias) name and passwords (`ANDROID_RELEASE_STORE_PASSWORD`, `ANDROID_RELEASE_KEY_ALIAS`, `ANDROID_RELEASE_KEY_PASSWORD`) 
* Slack webhook URL and channel name (`SLACK_URL`, `SLACK_CHANNEL`) for sending notifications upon build completion.

## The Android Fastfile

### Build Steps
This lane provides the generic steps to run the defined tasks for cleaning the build directory, installing Android dependencies, and building our APK for the desired flavor, using [Gradlew](https://docs.fastlane.tools/actions/gradle/).

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/a09976693f0b87839b6a801c5e6fb610

### Publish Steps
This lane retrieves the version and build number of our package and submits it to the Play Store, before finishing with a Slack notification that the release was successful.  

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/0c71d25963d6f179f37dbb35538a31d4

### Release Targets
After defining the generic steps for building and releasing, we can then reuse them for multiple flavors/targets by creating lanes for each.

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/44b014e7d7f311cb1b35a338c142be2c

> Alternatively we could define "debug only" lanes, which only run the build for local use without publishing, or store the APK on an alternate location (such as another S3 bucket).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we could define "debug only" lanes, which only run the build for local use without publishing, or store the APK on an alternate location (such as another S3 bucket).
```

## The GitHub Actions Workflow

After we have a working Fastlane configuration, the next step is to tie it to a CI/CD system so the build runs automatically with every push to the right branches. 
This is how this looks for a React Native application using an Ubuntu runner in GitHub Actions:

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/99f734d92cd6d84f423dee647a4e269b.js

> In a nutshell, here is this workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the workflow needed to achieve this:
```

> Here is the workflow needed to achieve this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a nutshell, here is this workflow:
```

* Checks out our code
* Installs the required version of Node
* Installs Node dependencies for the RN project
* Downloads the keystore and json API key file
* Generates a .env file with all the environment variables Gradle will insert into the APK
* Installs Fastlane and associated plugins (using [Bundler](https://bundler.io/))
* Runs the corresponding Lane

##  Summary

> Much like before with iOS, we have gone through another example of how to automate our mobile app deployment using Fastlane, a powerful free tool specifically designed for this, and showcased GitHub Actions as a good CI/CD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this piece, we looked at examples of how to automate mobile app deployment using Fastlane, a powerful free tool specifically designed for this. We also showcased GitHub Actions as a good CI/CD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. You can find complete working examples in our Open Source boilerplate projects, iOS Base and React Native Base.

All these cover just a couple of the many use cases you can apply these tools for -we highly recommend you to go through their extensive documentation sites.

Thanks for reading and stay tuned for more similar content!
```

<img src="images/android_robot.jpg" height="500" />

Now, I am going to describe the approach we implemented for Android CI/CD making use of Fastlane and a CI system (GitHub Actions). We used Amazon S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we could safely store encrypted files will work.

> For this example, we'll use an Android app developed with React Native, but the same approach also works when using other languages supported by the Android SDK, such as Kotlin. The key assumption here is that we will use [Gradle](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases/gradle-plugin) when building the APK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we'll use an Android app developed with React Native, but the same approach works when using other languages supported by the Android SDK, such as Kotlin. The key assumption here is that we will use [Gradle](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases/gradle-plugin) when building the APK.
```

> ## Prep work

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

### Registering Apps

> Within our Android project, we will define multiple [build flavors](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/build-variants), specified in our `build.gradle` file. For each of these, we would register an application in the Google Play Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within our Android project, we will define multiple [build flavors](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/build-variants), specified in our `build.gradle` file. For each of these, we need to register an application in the Google Play Console.
```

> # **How to Automate Android App Builds using Fastlane & GitHub Actions**

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

<img src="images/android_robot.jpg" height="500" />

> Now, I am going to describe the approach we implemented for Android CI/CD making use of Fastlane and a CI system (GitHub Actions). We used Amazon S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we could safely store encrypted files will work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, I am going to describe the approach we implemented for Android CI/CD, making use of Fastlane and a CI system (GitHub Actions). We used Amazon S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we can safely store encrypted files will work.
```

For this example, we'll use an Android app developed with React Native, but the same approach also works when using other languages supported by the Android SDK, such as Kotlin. The key assumption here is that we will use [Gradle](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases/gradle-plugin) when building the APK.

## Prep work

### Registering Apps

> Within our Android project we would define multiple [build flavors](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/build-variants), specified in our `build.gradle` file. For each of these we would register an application in the Google Play Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within our Android project, we will define multiple [build flavors](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/build-variants), specified in our `build.gradle` file. For each of these, we would register an application in the Google Play Console.
```

> After registering apps we will need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After registering apps we will need the following:
```

* A keystore file generated with Android Studio: https://developer.android.com/studio/publish/app-signing#generate-key
* An API key (in json format) with permissions to publish apps into the Play Console: https://developers.google.com/android-publisher

> Both files should be placed in a secure location and credentials required to retrieve them stored in the repo Secrets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both files should be placed in a secure location, with the credentials required to retrieve them stored in the repo Secrets.
```

> ### Code signing and API keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Code Signing and API keys
```

> In order to distribute our app, our APK needs to be signed with a certficate generated by Google. Unlike iOS, Fastlane does not offer an equivalent to their match feature which can handle certificate creation and management end to end; so we need to generate it manually once from Android Studio, following the steps in their [User Guide](https://developer.android.com/studio/publish/app-signing), and then store it somewhere our CICD can retrieve. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to distribute our app, our APK needs to be signed with a certificate generated by Google. Unlike iOS, Fastlane does not offer an equivalent to their match feature which can handle certificate creation and management end to end. So, we need to generate it manually once from Android Studio, following the steps in their [User Guide](https://developer.android.com/studio/publish/app-signing), and then store it somewhere our CICD can retrieve it. 
```

> For the latter, we will make use of [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/getting-started/). This is a good option for us as we typically use AWS S3 in all our projects and have to set AWS credentials in our working environment. One single bucket, encrypted with [AWS KMS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/UsingKMSEncryption.html) allows us to securely handle our Certificates, Keystores and other sensitive files for all our projects. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the latter, we will make use of [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/getting-started/). This is a good option for us as we typically use AWS S3 in all our projects, and have to set AWS credentials in our working environment. One single bucket, encrypted with [AWS KMS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/UsingKMSEncryption.html) allows us to securely handle our Certificates, Keystores and other sensitive files for all our projects. 
```

### Environment Variables

Our workflow should have the following sensitive keys defined as [Secrets](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/configuring-and-managing-workflows/creating-and-storing-encrypted-secrets) in the GitHub repo: 
* AWS keys (`AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`, `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`) associated with permissions to interact with the target bucket.
* Keystore and Upload Key(Alias) name and passwords (`ANDROID_RELEASE_STORE_PASSWORD`, `ANDROID_RELEASE_KEY_ALIAS`, `ANDROID_RELEASE_KEY_PASSWORD`) 
* Slack webhook URL and channel name (`SLACK_URL`, `SLACK_CHANNEL`) for sending notifications upon build completion.

## The Android Fastfile

### Build Steps
This lane provides the generic steps to run the defined tasks for cleaning the build directory, installing Android dependencies, and building our APK for the desired flavor, using [Gradlew](https://docs.fastlane.tools/actions/gradle/).

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/a09976693f0b87839b6a801c5e6fb610

> ### Publish steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Publish Steps
```

> This lane retrieves the version and build number of our package, and submits it to the Play Store, finishing with a Slack notification that the release was successful.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This lane retrieves the version and build number of our package and submits it to the Play Store, before finishing with a Slack notification that the release was successful.  
```

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/0c71d25963d6f179f37dbb35538a31d4

> ### Release targets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Release Targets
```

> After defining the generic steps for building and releasing, we can reuse them for multiple flavors/targets by creating lanes for each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining the generic steps for building and releasing, we can then reuse them for multiple flavors/targets by creating lanes for each.
```

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/44b014e7d7f311cb1b35a338c142be2c

Alternatively we could define "debug only" lanes, which only run the build for local use without publishing, or store the APK on an alternate location (such as another S3 bucket).

## The GitHub Actions Workflow

> After we have a working Fastlane configuration, the next step is tie it to a CI/CD system so the build runs automatically with every push to the right branches. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After we have a working Fastlane configuration, the next step is to tie it to a CI/CD system so the build runs automatically with every push to the right branches. 
```

This is how this looks for a React Native application using an Ubuntu runner in GitHub Actions:

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/99f734d92cd6d84f423dee647a4e269b.js

> In a nutshell, this workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a nutshell, here is this workflow:
```

# **How to Automate Android App Builds using Fastlane & GitHub Actions**

<img src="images/android_robot.jpg" height="500" />

Now, I am going to describe the approach we implemented for Android CI/CD making use of Fastlane and a CI system (GitHub Actions). We used Amazon S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we could safely store encrypted files will work.

> For this example we'll use an Android app developed with React Native, but the same approach works when developing with other languages supported by the Android SDK, such as Kotlin. The key assumption is that we use [Gradle](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases/gradle-plugin) for building the APK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we'll use an Android app developed with React Native, but the same approach also works when developing with other languages supported by the Android SDK, such as Kotlin. The key assumption is that we will use [Gradle](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases/gradle-plugin) for building the APK.
```

> If you are interested in using self-hosted machines to run your builds, there is a section about this on [iOS build automation](https://www.rootstrap.com/blog/how-to-automate-ios-app-builds-using-fastlane-github/) where we illustrate an example. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

# **How to Automate Android App Builds using Fastlane & GitHub Actions**

<img src="images/android_robot.jpg" height="500" />

> In this post I am going to describe the approach we implemented for Android CI/CD making use of Fastlane and a CI system (GitHub Actions). We also use Amazon S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we could safely store encrypted files would serve the purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, I am going to describe the approach we implemented for Android CI/CD making use of Fastlane and a CI system (GitHub Actions). We used Amazon S3 to store signing artifacts, but any system where we could safely store encrypted files will work.
```

> In the previous post about [iOS app automation](https://www.rootstrap.com/blog/how-to-automate-ios-app-builds-using-fastlane-github/) you can find a summary of why we chose [Fastlane](https://docs.fastlane.tools/) for automating our build and release steps, and [GitHub Actions]((https://github.com/features/actions)) for integrating it into a CICD workflow. To put it here in one line: they allow for simple, flexible, free(-ish), and fully version-controlled workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

# **How to Automate Android App Builds using Fastlane & GitHub Actions**

<img src="images/android_robot.jpg" height="500" />

> Mobile app development is one of our core competencies here at Rootstrap, and we embrace best practices for development and delivery just as much as for backend and web applications. Just as Continuous Integration and Continuos Delivery require maintaining multiple backend environments (Development, QA, Staging, Production), with fully automated deployments to each, it also requires maintaining multiple versions of our mobile apps, to match each environment. Building and releasing all these versions is a time consuming and error prone process, which should -and can be automated, even though it presents a particular set of challenges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## Prep work

### Registering Apps

Within our Android project we would define multiple [build flavors](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/build-variants), specified in our `build.gradle` file. For each of these we would register an application in the Google Play Console.
After registering apps we will need:
* A keystore file generated with Android Studio: https://developer.android.com/studio/publish/app-signing#generate-key
* An API key (in json format) with permissions to publish apps into the Play Console: https://developers.google.com/android-publisher

Both files should be placed in a secure location and credentials required to retrieve them stored in the repo Secrets.

### Code signing and API keys

In order to distribute our app, our APK needs to be signed with a certficate generated by Google. Unlike iOS, Fastlane does not offer an equivalent to their match feature which can handle certificate creation and management end to end; so we need to generate it manually once from Android Studio, following the steps in their [User Guide](https://developer.android.com/studio/publish/app-signing), and then store it somewhere our CICD can retrieve. 

> For the latter, we will make use of [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/getting-started/). This is a good optiopn for us as we typically use AWS S3 in all our projects and have to set AWS credentials in our working environment. One single bucket, encrypted with [AWS KMS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/UsingKMSEncryption.html) allows us to securely handle our Certificates, Keystores and other sensitive files for all our projects. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the latter, we will make use of [AWS S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/getting-started/). This is a good option for us as we typically use AWS S3 in all our projects and have to set AWS credentials in our working environment. One single bucket, encrypted with [AWS KMS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/UsingKMSEncryption.html) allows us to securely handle our Certificates, Keystores and other sensitive files for all our projects. 
```

### Build Steps
This lane provides the generic steps to run the defined tasks for cleaning the build directory, installing Android dependencies, and building our APK for the desired flavor, using [Gradlew](https://docs.fastlane.tools/actions/gradle/).

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/a09976693f0b87839b6a801c5e6fb610

### Publish steps
This lane retrieves the version and build number of our package, and submits it to the Play Store, finishing with a Slack notification that the release was successful.  

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/0c71d25963d6f179f37dbb35538a31d4

### Release targets
After defining the generic steps for building and releasing, we can reuse them for multiple flavors/targets by creating lanes for each.

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/44b014e7d7f311cb1b35a338c142be2c

Alternatively we could define "debug only" lanes, which only run the build for local use without publishing, or store the APK on an alternate location (such as another S3 bucket).

## The GitHub Actions Workflow

After we have a working Fastlane configuration, the next step is tie it to a CI/CD system so the build runs automatically with every push to the right branches. 

> This is how this looks for a React Natice application using an Ubuntu runner in GitHub Actions:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is how this looks for a React Native application using an Ubuntu runner in GitHub Actions:
```

> # **How to Automate Android App Builds using Fastlane and GitHub Actions**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# **How to Automate Android App Builds using Fastlane & GitHub Actions**
```

<img src="images/android_robot.jpg" height="500" />

> *This is a follow-up post to our post on iOS app automation, which you can find [here](https://www.rootstrap.com/blog/how-to-automate-ios-app-builds-using-fastlane-github/)*: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

### Release targets
After defining the generic steps for building and releasing, we can reuse them for multiple flavors/targets by creating lanes for each.

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/44b014e7d7f311cb1b35a338c142be2c

Alternatively we could define "debug only" lanes, which only run the build for local use without publishing, or store the APK on an alternate location (such as another S3 bucket).

## The GitHub Actions Workflow

After we have a working Fastlane configuration, the next step is tie it to a CI/CD system so the build runs automatically with every push to the right branches. 
This is how this looks for a React Native application using an Ubuntu runner in GitHub Actions:

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/99f734d92cd6d84f423dee647a4e269b.js

In a nutshell, this workflow:
* Checks out our code
* Installs the required version of Node
* Installs Node dependencies for the RN project
* Downloads the keystore and json API key file
* Generates a .env file with all the environment variables Gradle will insert into the APK
* Installs Fastlane and associated plugins (using [Bundler](https://bundler.io/))
* Runs the corresponding Lane

##  Summary

> Much like before with iOS, we have gone through another example of how to automate our mobile app deployment using Fastlane, a powerful free tool specifically designed for this, and showcased GitHub Actions as a good CICD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Much like before with iOS, we have gone through another example of how to automate our mobile app deployment using Fastlane, a powerful free tool specifically designed for this, and showcased GitHub Actions as a good CI/CD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. 
```

In a nutshell, here is this workflow:
* Checks out our code
* Installs the required version of Node
* Installs Node dependencies for the RN project
* Downloads the keystore and json API key file
* Generates a .env file with all the environment variables Gradle will insert into the APK
* Installs Fastlane and associated plugins (using [Bundler](https://bundler.io/))
* Runs the corresponding Lane

##  Summary

In this piece, we looked at examples of how to automate mobile app deployment using Fastlane, a powerful free tool specifically designed for this. 

We also showcased GitHub Actions as a good CI/CD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. 

You can find complete Fastlane working examples in our Open Source boilerplate projects, [Android Base](https://github.com/rootstrap/android-base) and [React Native Base](https://github.com/rootstrap/react-native-base).

All these cover just a couple of the many use cases you can apply these tools for -we highly recommend you to go through their extensive documentation sites.

Thanks for reading and stay tuned for more similar content!

> All these cover just a couple of the many use cases you can apply these tools for -we highly recommend you to go through their extensive documentation sites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## The GitHub Actions Workflow

After we have a working Fastlane configuration, the next step is to tie it to a CI/CD system so the build runs automatically with every push to the right branches. 
This is how this looks for a React Native application using an Ubuntu runner in GitHub Actions:

https://gist.github.com/sebalopez/99f734d92cd6d84f423dee647a4e269b.js

In a nutshell, here is this workflow:
* Checks out our code
* Installs the required version of Node
* Installs Node dependencies for the RN project
* Downloads the keystore and json API key file
* Generates a .env file with all the environment variables Gradle will insert into the APK
* Installs Fastlane and associated plugins (using [Bundler](https://bundler.io/))
* Runs the corresponding Lane

##  Summary

In this piece, we looked at examples of how to automate mobile app deployment using Fastlane, a powerful free tool specifically designed for this. 

We also showcased GitHub Actions as a good CI/CD system that can integrate with Fastlane to trigger our pipelines automatically and in a secure environment. 

> You can find complete working examples in our Open Source boilerplate projects, iOS Base and React Native Base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find complete Fastlane working examples in our Open Source boilerplate projects, [Android Base](https://github.com/rootstrap/android-base) and [React Native Base](https://github.com/rootstrap/react-native-base).
```

All these cover just a couple of the many use cases you can apply these tools for -we highly recommend you to go through their extensive documentation sites.

Thanks for reading and stay tuned for more similar content!

> You can find complete Fastlane working examples in our Open Source boilerplate projects, [Android Base](https://github.com/rootstrap/android-base) and [React Native Base](https://github.com/rootstrap/react-native-base).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> All these cover just a couple of the many use cases you can apply these tools for -we highly recommend you to go through their extensive documentation sites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
